README.md, before:

asm
==============

[![Check Links](https://github.com/0xAX/asm/actions/workflows/link-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/0xAX/asm/actions/workflows/link-check.yaml)

Learning assembly for linux-x64

Examples
==============

  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 1](https://0xax.github.io/asm_1/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 2](https://0xax.github.io/asm_2/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 3](https://0xax.github.io/asm_3/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 4](https://0xax.github.io/asm_4/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 5](https://0xax.github.io/asm_5/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 6](https://0xax.github.io/asm_6/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 7](https://0xax.github.io/asm_7/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 8](https://0xax.github.io/asm_8/)

Chinese translation:

  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 1]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-1.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 2]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-2.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 3]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-3.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 4]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-4.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 5]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-5.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 6]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-6.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 7]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-7.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 8]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-8.md)

Author
==============

[@0xAX](https://x.com/0xAX)

Commit message:

add LICENSE information
Signed-off-by: Alexander Kuleshov <kuleshovmail@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

asm
==============

[![CC BY-NC-SA 4.0][cc-by-nc-sa-shield]][cc-by-nc-sa] [![Check Links](https://github.com/0xAX/asm/actions/workflows/link-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/0xAX/asm/actions/workflows/link-check.yaml)

Learning assembly for linux-x64

Examples
==============

  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 1](https://0xax.github.io/asm_1/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 2](https://0xax.github.io/asm_2/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 3](https://0xax.github.io/asm_3/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 4](https://0xax.github.io/asm_4/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 5](https://0xax.github.io/asm_5/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 6](https://0xax.github.io/asm_6/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 7](https://0xax.github.io/asm_7/)
  * [Say hello to x86_64 Assembly part 8](https://0xax.github.io/asm_8/)

Chinese translation:

  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 1]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-1.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 2]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-2.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 3]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-3.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 4]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-4.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 5]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-5.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 6]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-6.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 7]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-7.md)
  * [译文: Say hello to x64 Assembly [part 8]](https://github.com/time-river/vvl.me/blob/master/source/_posts/translation-Say-hello-to-x64-Assembly-part-8.md)

License
==============

This work is licensed under a
[Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License][cc-by-nc-sa].

[![CC BY-NC-SA 4.0][cc-by-nc-sa-image]][cc-by-nc-sa]

[cc-by-nc-sa]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
[cc-by-nc-sa-image]: https://licensebuttons.net/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/88x31.png
[cc-by-nc-sa-shield]: https://img.shields.io/badge/License-CC%20BY--NC--SA%204.0-lightgrey.svg

Author
==============

[@0xAX](https://x.com/0xAX)

Additinal big thanks to [@klaudiagrz](https://github.com/klaudiagrz) for text improvements.
